However.
NOTE CONF
Hello, everyone.
Welcome back to, uh, uh, calculus and its applications.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is our second lecture of the week, and
we continue to explore limits and continuity of functions.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so let's just jump right in.
Uh, sorry, I have to, uh, there is a whole
NOTE CONF
club question for you here.
Uh, yes, you can see it.
NOTE CONF
Uh, please vote on it in the next.
Can you actually see it, though?
NOTE CONF
Like.
Yeah, maybe this is better.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
In the next couple of minutes, you can discuss with
NOTE CONF
your peers.
Okay, I think.
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
Uh, well, I think it has been five minutes.
NOTE CONF
And the voting, like almost everyone voted, although there are
still some votes, I think, coming in.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
Well, interesting.
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
We have, uh, we have two popular answers.
NOTE CONF
One of them has the majority.
Uh, the other one is also pretty, uh, I'd say
NOTE CONF
pretty popular.
All right, let's let's think about this together.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Uh, right.
First of all.
NOTE CONF
First of all, whenever you see something like this.
Some kind of inequality.
NOTE CONF
Like inequality.
Including, sorry, not including involving three, uh, functions.
NOTE CONF
And you're asked about the limit.
I hope your intuition immediately starts screaming two words.
NOTE CONF
What are those words?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Squeeze theorem.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, whatever.
You see this and you're like.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it looks like something's being squeezed.
Squeezed in.
NOTE CONF
And you see limit.
You're like, squeeze theorem.
NOTE CONF
Now, the thing is, you cannot immediately unless you remember
the statement by heart of the squeeze theorem, you cannot
NOTE CONF
immediately apply it.
You have to be careful.
NOTE CONF
Right.
But your first instinct is, oh, this looks like it
NOTE CONF
could use the squeeze theorem, but your next step should
be.
NOTE CONF
Oh, let me go and check the statement and see
if it really applies here.
NOTE CONF
Because maybe I cannot apply that theorem because some of
the assumptions of the theorem are not satisfied.
NOTE CONF
So I you have your squeeze theorem.
And uh, let me.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that's that's not great.
That's not great.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, unfortunately, now I know how to fix this.
NOTE CONF
I know how to fix this.
I will switch one of them to cam, and I
NOTE CONF
will write the question now.
So we have.
NOTE CONF
So we have f of x is Minus one over
three.
NOTE CONF
X cubed plus x squared minus seven over three.
And we have h of x cosine phi over two
NOTE CONF
x.
We have this.
NOTE CONF
When x is close enough whatever that means to two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So those are the assumptions in our in the in
the question.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now let's go check your squeeze theorem.
NOTE CONF
So your squeeze theorem is where I will find it
now.
NOTE CONF
And together we'll check if it's good.
It's right here.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So let's check that the assumptions of the theorem apply.
NOTE CONF
So we need f, g and h x to be
defined for all x not equal to A.
NOTE CONF
A in this case is two right on an open
interval containing a.
NOTE CONF
Well, we're lucky this one holds everywhere because what do
we have.
NOTE CONF
We have a nice polynomial.
Polynomials are defined everywhere.
NOTE CONF
And we have cosine which is also defined everywhere.
So the first assumption of the theorem is satisfied.
NOTE CONF
This one.
Good check.
NOTE CONF
Let's move on to the next one.
Now for this one we have to be slightly more
NOTE CONF
careful.
Right now this holds for x not equal to two
NOTE CONF
in an open interval Containing a write all.
So our question tells us that this holds when x
NOTE CONF
is close enough to two.
So let's make some sense of this.
NOTE CONF
And to make some sense of this I will have
to show you some graphs.
NOTE CONF
On GeoGebra.
Okay, so I, I sketched the the functions that are
NOTE CONF
in the question.
So the green one is the polynomial and the blue
NOTE CONF
one is the cosine obviously.
Now let's look what happens right.
NOTE CONF
So this this makes sense when we're somewhere here right.
It doesn't make sense for example here because Because here
NOTE CONF
the blue graph lies above the sorry, the green graph.
The polynomial lies above the blue one, but around two.
NOTE CONF
And that's where we're interested.
That's the region we're interested in.
NOTE CONF
This is fine.
So our question tells us that the this third, uh,
NOTE CONF
function, whose limit we want to compute it lies somewhere
here.
NOTE CONF
It lies here.
And it doesn't matter that they intersect at two.
NOTE CONF
Because the point two we're not really interested in.
Because you see, it says x not equal to two.
NOTE CONF
But if we take an open interval around two, for
example, I don't know the interval from 0 to 4
NOTE CONF
or from 1 to 3 or like even a very
small one here, like from One and a half to
NOTE CONF
two and a half.
Doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
It just has to be open.
Then this.
NOTE CONF
This is fine.
We are okay.
NOTE CONF
And our question tells us that this also this condition
is also satisfied.
NOTE CONF
So we have an interval which shows an interval.
Let's say from 1 to 3.
NOTE CONF
And this this inequality is satisfied.
So both assumptions of the squeeze theorem are now satisfied.
NOTE CONF
So we're safe.
And we can say that the function that's in the
NOTE CONF
middle, its limit at the point two at this point
will be the same as the limit of these two
NOTE CONF
functions at that point.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions about what I have said until
this point.
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
So I have to come closer.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Oh, excellent question, excellent question.
NOTE CONF
Very good question.
Uh, right.
NOTE CONF
Excellent question.
Uh, let me switch to the projector.
NOTE CONF
Very important question.
What does what is an open interval?
NOTE CONF
Uh, right.
So in, in this course.
NOTE CONF
So or for functions.
Uh, well no let us say on R right.
NOTE CONF
We're interested in the real rail line.
Open intervals are intervals of the form.
NOTE CONF
A b.
So for example A, where a is less than b.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And the endpoints are not included.
NOTE CONF
So it's here this part where unfortunately I don't have
another colour of a pad.
NOTE CONF
But these these points are not included.
So basically all the points between A and B not
NOTE CONF
including A and B.
So right.
NOTE CONF
That's a let me zoom out so that you can
see this better.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So all the points.
NOTE CONF
Between A and B not.
Including.
NOTE CONF
A and B.
Does that answer the question?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
But that's a very good question because it's, uh, this
NOTE CONF
is one of the.
Main, uh, extremely important objects in calculus and analysis.
NOTE CONF
Open sets or open intervals.
Uh, in this case, we're interested in an interval.
NOTE CONF
Uh, are.
The they are the.
NOTE CONF
You will see it maybe next here or maybe later.
But they are the basis of something called topology on
NOTE CONF
your space.
So this is a very fundamental and very important object.
NOTE CONF
It's crucial that you understand what it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now that we've taken care of that.
Let's go back.
NOTE CONF
Maybe like this.
Oh, actually sorry.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So that was the open interval business.
NOTE CONF
Now we can apply the squeeze theorem because we checked
that everything's satisfied.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, uh, using the squeeze theorem.
Limit as x goes to two of g of x
NOTE CONF
has to be equal to the limit as x goes
to two of f of x, and the limit as
NOTE CONF
x goes to two of h of x.
And they better be the same.
NOTE CONF
But.
They will be.
NOTE CONF
So f of x is the polynomial.
It's continuous.
NOTE CONF
I can just plug in two times a plus four
minus seven over three minus five plus four is minus
NOTE CONF
one.
And the limit of cosine pi over two times x.
NOTE CONF
That's just.
Of cosine by that's also minus one.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Hence Limit of x.
NOTE CONF
Sorry of G.
Uh, minus one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so this was the correct answer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
Are there any questions about this question?
NOTE CONF
I think this is the longest question on today's, uh,
from today's list.
NOTE CONF
So make sure if you have any questions, please ask.
So what did we do?
NOTE CONF
We looked at the question and we thought, oh, that
reminds me of the squeeze theorem.
NOTE CONF
But then the next step is can I actually apply
the squeeze theorem?
NOTE CONF
Let me check all the assumptions.
We checked all the assumptions.
NOTE CONF
We figured out we could indeed apply the squeeze theorem.
And we did.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
All right.
I will move to the next question then.
NOTE CONF
Oh, why are they also okay?
Is this true or is this false?
NOTE CONF
The function x squared minus four x plus three divided
by x squared minus one is continuous over the interval
NOTE CONF
closed interval from 0 to 3.
That gives me another opportunity to remind you of some
NOTE CONF
topology which I will use.
So yeah please vote and you can discuss with each
NOTE CONF
other.
Okay, so the voting seems to have slowed down by
NOTE CONF
a lot, although not everyone has voted.
Well, let's just discuss the question in that case.
NOTE CONF
Well, so the question is, uh, is the following statement
true or false?
NOTE CONF
Uh, do we have the dog camp still?
Yes we do.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
Um, okay, so first of all, let me get something
NOTE CONF
out of the way.
We talked about open intervals in the previous question and
NOTE CONF
here we have the interval.
Well, right.
NOTE CONF
This um, so this is referred to as a closed
interval.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So it is, it is all the points from 0
NOTE CONF
to 3, including this time including zero and three.
So all the points.
NOTE CONF
Between 0 and 3 including.
Zero and three.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So all everything here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, so if we had if by contrast, we had.
NOTE CONF
We had the interval.
Like this, then these parts will not be would not
NOTE CONF
be included.
So the difference between.
NOTE CONF
Between.
Closed.
NOTE CONF
Open is the inclusion.
Or exclusion.
NOTE CONF
Of the endpoints.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's that's what we have here now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh now the question is uh is the following function.
Is continuous.
NOTE CONF
On.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What does that mean?
So if you.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if you go to.
Uh, where that must be 186 the, uh.
NOTE CONF
So here on page 186, you have the definition of,
uh, continuity over interval.
NOTE CONF
So a function is continuous over a closed interval of
this form.
NOTE CONF
If it's continuous at every point.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So a function is continuous over an open interval.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well no.
Over.
NOTE CONF
So it's continuous over a closed interval of this form.
F is continuous at every point in the open interval,
NOTE CONF
and it's continuous from the right at the at a
and from the left at b.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So need to check.
NOTE CONF
That.
Let me check a uh x squared minus four x
NOTE CONF
plus three and so on is continuous at every point.
And here and continuous uh from the right.
NOTE CONF
At zero and from the left at three.
Now the thing is, Uh, in this case.
NOTE CONF
So what's the problem in this case?
Uh, so those of you who voted.
NOTE CONF
No, it's the correct answer.
But what was the problem?
NOTE CONF
Why did you vote?
No.
NOTE CONF
Yes, please.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
Did you raise your hand?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
It is.
That's correct.
NOTE CONF
So the problem is at the point where x equals
one, right?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Very good indeed.
NOTE CONF
So the problem is that this function is not defined
when x equals one.
NOTE CONF
So and Uh.
So the answer is no.
NOTE CONF
Because the function is not defined at x equals one.
And if you're not defined at that point, you can't
NOTE CONF
be continuous.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
And by the way x equals one belongs to the
open interval zero three.
NOTE CONF
So.
It's uh.
NOTE CONF
So the first assumption there.
So this one is violated.
NOTE CONF
It's not continuous at every point because the point one
is here and the function is not continuous at that
NOTE CONF
point.
So this function is not continuous on the on the
NOTE CONF
close interval.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So remember the definition of continuity.
We needed the the the limit at the point to
NOTE CONF
equal the value of the function at that point.
So we cannot it cannot be continuous at all because
NOTE CONF
the function doesn't even have a value at one okay.
So this function is not continuous at the on this
NOTE CONF
interval because it is not even defined at one.
Are there any questions about this.
NOTE CONF
Just a matter of checking.
Going back to definitions.
NOTE CONF
So looking at the definitions and see if they are
satisfied.
NOTE CONF
Okay next question.
Why is that.
NOTE CONF
Why are they also.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
So often we will see functions given in this form
NOTE CONF
where it's given by one by some kind of formula
on one part of the real line and by another
NOTE CONF
formula on the other part of the real line.
And you have to check some statements about these functions.
NOTE CONF
Uh, all right, so we have some, uh, uh, we're
voting a bit more reluctantly.
NOTE CONF
Um, but.
And we have, um.
NOTE CONF
Well, so.
Okay, let's, let's let's discuss this together.
NOTE CONF
So.
Um, when you have a function of this form.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So you see that if x is less than one,
NOTE CONF
uh, your function is x squared, which is a nice,
uh, polynomial function, and it is continuous.
NOTE CONF
Uh, everywhere.
Uh, well, actually everywhere.
NOTE CONF
And when x is greater than or equal to one,
you have the square root which is also a nice
NOTE CONF
continuous function.
So your only problem could be where they meet because
NOTE CONF
you don't know how they meet and what happens there.
So we need to investigate whether it's continuous at this
NOTE CONF
point where they meet.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Well, let's do that.
So let's do that.
NOTE CONF
So.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Let me just put that here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We need to see what happens at.
NOTE CONF
At the point.
X equals one.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the value of the function f at one is.
NOTE CONF
So we are in this situation.
So it's one here is square root of one.
NOTE CONF
So one good.
Uh so in order to check continuity we have to
NOTE CONF
check if the limit at that point is also one.
So to check continuity.
NOTE CONF
Uh, need to check if limit as x goes to
one of f.
NOTE CONF
Uh, x is one.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we need to evaluate the left limit and the
right limit.
NOTE CONF
So as x goes to one from the left of
f of x is what.
NOTE CONF
So when x is less than one it's this.
Well this is just one right.
NOTE CONF
So I chose I'm using this function because when we
go when we approach one from the left it's right.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Our function is equal to x squared and the limit
is one.
NOTE CONF
Now when we approach one from the right.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
This is equal to.
Now the function becomes a square root of x.
NOTE CONF
Because when you're greater than one it's the square root
of x.
NOTE CONF
Well but the limit here is also one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So thus the we have limit.
Of f of x from the left equals limit of
NOTE CONF
f of x from the right and equals f at
one.
NOTE CONF
Hence f is continuous.
At x equals one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what did we what did we do to summarise?
NOTE CONF
Uh, we, uh the function.
We realised that the only problem this function could have
NOTE CONF
was that the place where these functions meet.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so at one and then we investigated the behaviour
of that function, namely the continuity.
NOTE CONF
And we realised that the left limit equals the right
limit and equals the value of the function at that
NOTE CONF
point.
Hence it is continuous at that point.
NOTE CONF
And therefore this whole thing is continuous everywhere.
Are there any questions?
NOTE CONF
Do you have a question.
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So and let's let's maybe solve one more question.
NOTE CONF
Uh here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This should be relatively simple because we have seen.
something about this in the previous lecture.
NOTE CONF
It's.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank.
You.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have two minutes left, So let's discuss the
answer.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Well, the as overwhelming as the overwhelming majority chose false.
NOTE CONF
And they are correct.
So what's the problem here?
NOTE CONF
Well, we also need the function to be defined at
the point.
NOTE CONF
And we need the value of the function to agree
with those limits.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So this statement is false.
NOTE CONF
It's false because yeah you can have the two limits
existing and agreeing.
NOTE CONF
But the function will not be defined at the point.
And in fact I will remind you we had we
NOTE CONF
had an example in the previous lecture.
Remember here like both limits exist and equal but the
NOTE CONF
function is not defined here, hence it's not continuous at
that point.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is all for today.
Um, I will see you in week four and at
NOTE CONF
the workshops.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF